paper/DesignSpecification.md, before:

# River Runner - Whitewater Kayaking Predictions - Design Specification

## Components

### Retrieve Historical Data
Historical data will be retrieved via single use Python scripts that scrape, process, and commit historical data to the database described in this document. The main modules being used for this will be `json`, `re`, `requests`, and `pandas`.

#### River/Run Information
The runs being processed by this application are static and gathered at the time of initial development. Each run is retrieved from <a alt='Professor Paddle' href='http://www.professorpaddle.com'>Professor Paddle </a>. Initial river IDs are pulled from Professor Paddle's main page with Chrome dev tools and JQuery. URLs are then generated for each river and retrieved via `requests` and processed character-by-character into a Pandas data frame and saved to '/data/rivers.csv'. `def scrape_river_urls()`

<b>relational mapping</b> - <i>river_run</i>  
* <em>river_id</em>: <em>integer</em> PK as pulled  from <a alt='Professor Paddle' href='http://www.professorpaddle.com'>Professor Paddle </a>
* class_rating: <em>varchar(31)</em> - white water rating
* max_level: <em>integer</em> - maximum recommended stream flow for run
* min_level: <em>integer</em> - minimum recommended stream flow for run
* put_in_latitude: <em>real</em> - run starting point latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* put_in_longitude: <em>real</em> - run starting point longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude
* distance: <em>real</em> - run length
* river_name: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of river
* run_name: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of run
* take_out_latitude: <em>real</em> - run ending point latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* take_out_longitude: <em>real</em> - run ending point longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude

Associated address information is processed in `def parse_addresses_from_rivers()`.

#### Temperature/Precipitation Data
Temperature and precipitation data was gathered through individual requests for each station on the NOAA website. Each request returned a CSV file with all recording for the specific weather station. Addresses and stations were parsed from these files in `def parse_addresses_and_stations_from_precip()`.

#### Snowpack Data
Initial snowpack data was retrieved from <a alt='NOAA snowpack' href='https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/snow-and-ice/daily-snow/'>NOAA</a>.
The function `def scrape_snowfall()` retrieves snowpack data for all reporting stations in Washington, one day at a 
time. Results are saved to 'data/snowfall.csv' and manually uploaded to the database.

<b>relational mapping</b> - stored to <i>metric</i>, <i>station</i>, and <i>measurement</i>  
gathered attributes are
* date: <em>timestamp</em> - timestamp measurement was recorded
* lat:  <em>real</em> - geographical latitude of reporting station
* lon:  <em>real</em> - geographical longitude of reporting station
* location_name: <em>varchar(31)</em> - name of reporting station
* depth: <em>real</em> - recorded depth of snow measured in inches

Addresses and stations associated with each measurement are processed from their respective latitude and longitudes through `def parse_addresses_and_stations_from_snowfal()` and saved to the csv file described above.

#### Location Data
Address information is retrieved using `requests` through Google's <a alt='Google Geocoding' href='https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geocoding/start'>Geocoding API</a>. Each latitude and longitude pair throughout the application is processed through the API in order to retrieve related political boundary information. JSON results are processed through  `def parse_location_components()` and inserted into the database.

<b>relational mapping</b>
<b>state</b> - <i>state indentification information</i>    
* short_name: <em>varchar(2)</em> -  two letter state indicator code, PK
* long_name: <em>varchar(31)</em> - state’s full spelling    

<b>address</b> - <i>political boundary data related to GPS locations</i>     
* latitude: <em>real</em> - GPS position in decimal degree (DD) formatting, PK
* longitude: <em>real</em> - GPS position in decimal degree (DD) formatting, PK
* city: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of closest city
* county: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of county
* state: <em>varchar(2)</em> - two letter state identification code, FK->[state].short_name
* address: <em>varchar(255)</em> - closest street address to point
* zip: <em>varchar(10)</em> - zip code

#### River Metric Data
For all river runs in Washington, we would like to have time series data for streamflow and other available metrics to use as  predictors for streamflow. We first retrieve a list of all <a href='https://waterdata.usgs.gov/wa/nwis/uv'>USGS stream sites</a> (stations) in the state of Washington and formulate a list of all metrics (that are <a href='https://help.waterdata.usgs.gov/parameter_cd?group_cd=%'>provided by USGS</a>) we would like to include in our model as predictors. Using these lists and python's `requests` module, the retrieval process is outlined below:

* Call USGS's Instantaneous Values API for each combination of site and metric, returning data in a JSON format
* Extract timestamp and measurement value from JSON format and write to CSV file
* Insert records in CSV file into the database

<b>relational mapping</b> - <i>measurement</i>
* site_id: <em>varchar(31)</em> - id of site taken directly from list of all USGS stream sites
* metric_id: <em>varchar(31)</em> - id of metric taken directly from list of all USGS metrics
* date_time: <em>timestamp</em> - timestamp when measurement was recorded
* value: <em>real</em> - recorded measurement

#### Additional schema information
All data will be gathered and processed according to this specification before being committed for persistence. Persistence will be managed through an RDBMS - PostgresSQL 10.3 - Ubuntu Server 16.04 LTE.
</br>
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kentdanas/RiverRunner/master/doc/schema.png" width=400 style='display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto'>
<br/>
Each table listed below indices on it's primary key unless otherwise noted.

<b>station</b> - <i>weather reporting stations for both NOAA and USGS data points</i>    
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: the station id for the weather station as listed by the station's data , PK
* source <em>varchar(4)</em> the original data source author
* name <em>varach(255)</em> the human readable statin name as listed by original data source
* latitude <em>real</em> station's geographical latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* longitude <em>real</em> station's geographical longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (latitude, longitude)
+ unclustered index on (station_id) 

<b>station_river_distance</b> - <i>stores geographical distances between each run and each weather station.</i> 
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: station for which distance is computed, PK, FK->[station].station_id
* river_id <em>integer</em>: river for which distance is computed, PK, FK->[river_run].river_id  
* put_in_distance <em>real</em>: distance measured in miles from run's starting point to weather station
* take_out_distance <em>real</em>: distance measured in miles from run's ending point to weather station

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (put_in_distance)
+ unclustered index on (station_id, river_id)

Distances are calculated via the following code snippet
```python
    a = sin((lat2-lat1)/2)**2 + cos(lat1) * cos(lat2) * sin((lon2-lon1)/2)**2
    c = 2*atan2(sqrt(a), sqrt(1 - a))

    return r*c*0.621371
```

<b>metric</b> - <i>stores all the metric types that will be used for prediction</i>     
* metric_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: the metric's id as listed by original data source, PK
* name <em>varchar(31)</em>: the metric's human readable name as listed by original data source
* description <em>varchar(255)</em>: brief description of the metric
* units <em>varchar(31)</em>: units for which the metric is recorded in

<b>measurement</b> - <i>stores all gathered measurements from each weather station</i>     
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em> id of weather station for which the measurement was recorded, PK, FK->[station].station_id
* metric_id <em>varchar(31)</em> id of associated metric being measured, PK, FK->[metric].metric_id
* date_time <em>timestamp</em> timestamp for when the measurement was recorded, PK
* value <em>real</em> the measurement value recorded

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (date_time)
+ unclustered index on (station_id), (metric_id)

### Continuous Data Retrieval
Retrieving all static and historical data need only be done once, but to keep the data up to date we need to continuously retrieve and integrate all new time series data into the database. The plan is to retrieve new time series data from the following categories on a daily basis.

#### Temperature/Precipitation Data
Since retrieving historical temperature and precipitation data from NOAA involves sending a request and receiving an email in response containing a link to download the requested data (a process that would be cumbersome to repeat on a daily basis), it would be ideal to find a separate source for daily temperature and precipitation data. After a separate source is found with simpler automatability, we will begin the process of automatically retrieving and ingesting time series temperature and precipitation data into the database on a daily basis.

#### Snowpack Data
As part of the process of retrieving historical snowpack data, we retrieve time series data one day at a time. So, the `scrape_snowfall()` function can seemlessly be reused to continuously retrieve new data, with the only modification needed is to automate the uploading of snowpack data into the database.

#### River Metric Data
<a href='https://waterservices.usgs.gov/rest/IV-Test-Tool.html'>USGS's Instantaneous Values API</a> makes it easy to automate the continuous retrieval of time series data. The only difference between retrieving historical data and continuously retrieving river metric data from USGS is eliminating the creation of an intermediate CSV file and, instead, inserting the JSON data returned from the API directly into the database.

### Web server
A simple web server will be required to process user requests. This will be implemented using nodejs running on Ubuntu Server 16.06 LTE.

<b>Web requests</b> will be processed through a single nodejs HTTP endpoint.

<b>Prediction data</b> will be provided on demand and cached by the browser once retrieved. These requests will go through the same HTTP endpoint and provide JSON data as a result.

### Server side predictions
Future river flow rates will be predicted using a seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model generated from historic USGS river flow rate time series data. Snowpack, temperature, and precipitation will be included in the models as exogenous predictor variables. The order of the ARIMA models (i.e. p, d, and q parameters) will be determined after further exploration of the data. Since stream flow data is highly seasonal, the data will not be stationary and will require some seasonal differencing. Autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots will be used to determine the necessary lag order and moving average order.

The ARIMA models will be generated in python using the statsmodels.tsa.statespace.sarimax package's SARIMAX (Seasonal AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average with exogenous regressors model) function. Plots of the actual and predicted flow rates will be generated using python's matplotlib package.

Immediately following daily data retrieval, the ARIMA model will be recalculated with results being placed in separate JSON files for easy retrieval.

### Client side interface
A single HTML page will be created matching the mockup described in the functional specifications of this application. The page will store all required javascript and CSS data as the entire application only consists of a single page.

## Interactions
### Use case 1: The paddler
The paddler requests to view stream flow predictions for a specific kayaking run. The user has two options for finding a river's flow rate predictions:
1. User searches for a river by typing the river name in the top search bar. The bar will autopopulate with a drop down to filter run names as the user types. Selecting a run will request a prediction.
2. User views the runs populated on the map, clicking a point to retrieve predictions.

The page will have loaded with a .csv file containing predictions for the following two weeks. Using javascript, the prediction image will redraw with the selected run's prediction.

Commit message:

update server side predictions section w/ new ARIMA info

paper/DesignSpecification.md, after:

# River Runner - Whitewater Kayaking Predictions - Design Specification

## Components

### Retrieve Historical Data
Historical data will be retrieved via single use Python scripts that scrape, process, and commit historical data to the database described in this document. The main modules being used for this will be `json`, `re`, `requests`, and `pandas`.

#### River/Run Information
The runs being processed by this application are static and gathered at the time of initial development. Each run is retrieved from <a alt='Professor Paddle' href='http://www.professorpaddle.com'>Professor Paddle </a>. Initial river IDs are pulled from Professor Paddle's main page with Chrome dev tools and JQuery. URLs are then generated for each river and retrieved via `requests` and processed character-by-character into a Pandas data frame and saved to '/data/rivers.csv'. `def scrape_river_urls()`

<b>relational mapping</b> - <i>river_run</i>  
* <em>river_id</em>: <em>integer</em> PK as pulled  from <a alt='Professor Paddle' href='http://www.professorpaddle.com'>Professor Paddle </a>
* class_rating: <em>varchar(31)</em> - white water rating
* max_level: <em>integer</em> - maximum recommended stream flow for run
* min_level: <em>integer</em> - minimum recommended stream flow for run
* put_in_latitude: <em>real</em> - run starting point latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* put_in_longitude: <em>real</em> - run starting point longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude
* distance: <em>real</em> - run length
* river_name: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of river
* run_name: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of run
* take_out_latitude: <em>real</em> - run ending point latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* take_out_longitude: <em>real</em> - run ending point longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude

Associated address information is processed in `def parse_addresses_from_rivers()`.

#### Temperature/Precipitation Data
Temperature and precipitation data was gathered through individual requests for each station on the NOAA website. Each request returned a CSV file with all recording for the specific weather station. Addresses and stations were parsed from these files in `def parse_addresses_and_stations_from_precip()`.

#### Snowpack Data
Initial snowpack data was retrieved from <a alt='NOAA snowpack' href='https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/snow-and-ice/daily-snow/'>NOAA</a>.
The function `def scrape_snowfall()` retrieves snowpack data for all reporting stations in Washington, one day at a 
time. Results are saved to 'data/snowfall.csv' and manually uploaded to the database.

<b>relational mapping</b> - stored to <i>metric</i>, <i>station</i>, and <i>measurement</i>  
gathered attributes are
* date: <em>timestamp</em> - timestamp measurement was recorded
* lat:  <em>real</em> - geographical latitude of reporting station
* lon:  <em>real</em> - geographical longitude of reporting station
* location_name: <em>varchar(31)</em> - name of reporting station
* depth: <em>real</em> - recorded depth of snow measured in inches

Addresses and stations associated with each measurement are processed from their respective latitude and longitudes through `def parse_addresses_and_stations_from_snowfal()` and saved to the csv file described above.

#### Location Data
Address information is retrieved using `requests` through Google's <a alt='Google Geocoding' href='https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geocoding/start'>Geocoding API</a>. Each latitude and longitude pair throughout the application is processed through the API in order to retrieve related political boundary information. JSON results are processed through  `def parse_location_components()` and inserted into the database.

<b>relational mapping</b>
<b>state</b> - <i>state indentification information</i>    
* short_name: <em>varchar(2)</em> -  two letter state indicator code, PK
* long_name: <em>varchar(31)</em> - state’s full spelling    

<b>address</b> - <i>political boundary data related to GPS locations</i>     
* latitude: <em>real</em> - GPS position in decimal degree (DD) formatting, PK
* longitude: <em>real</em> - GPS position in decimal degree (DD) formatting, PK
* city: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of closest city
* county: <em>varchar(255)</em> - name of county
* state: <em>varchar(2)</em> - two letter state identification code, FK->[state].short_name
* address: <em>varchar(255)</em> - closest street address to point
* zip: <em>varchar(10)</em> - zip code

#### River Metric Data
For all river runs in Washington, we would like to have time series data for streamflow and other available metrics to use as  predictors for streamflow. We first retrieve a list of all <a href='https://waterdata.usgs.gov/wa/nwis/uv'>USGS stream sites</a> (stations) in the state of Washington and formulate a list of all metrics (that are <a href='https://help.waterdata.usgs.gov/parameter_cd?group_cd=%'>provided by USGS</a>) we would like to include in our model as predictors. Using these lists and python's `requests` module, the retrieval process is outlined below:

* Call USGS's Instantaneous Values API for each combination of site and metric, returning data in a JSON format
* Extract timestamp and measurement value from JSON format and write to CSV file
* Insert records in CSV file into the database

<b>relational mapping</b> - <i>measurement</i>
* site_id: <em>varchar(31)</em> - id of site taken directly from list of all USGS stream sites
* metric_id: <em>varchar(31)</em> - id of metric taken directly from list of all USGS metrics
* date_time: <em>timestamp</em> - timestamp when measurement was recorded
* value: <em>real</em> - recorded measurement

#### Additional schema information
All data will be gathered and processed according to this specification before being committed for persistence. Persistence will be managed through an RDBMS - PostgresSQL 10.3 - Ubuntu Server 16.04 LTE.
</br>
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kentdanas/RiverRunner/master/doc/schema.png" width=400 style='display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto'>
<br/>
Each table listed below indices on it's primary key unless otherwise noted.

<b>station</b> - <i>weather reporting stations for both NOAA and USGS data points</i>    
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: the station id for the weather station as listed by the station's data , PK
* source <em>varchar(4)</em> the original data source author
* name <em>varach(255)</em> the human readable statin name as listed by original data source
* latitude <em>real</em> station's geographical latitude (DD), FK->[addresses].latitude
* longitude <em>real</em> station's geographical longitude (DD), FK->[addresses].longitude

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (latitude, longitude)
+ unclustered index on (station_id) 

<b>station_river_distance</b> - <i>stores geographical distances between each run and each weather station.</i> 
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: station for which distance is computed, PK, FK->[station].station_id
* river_id <em>integer</em>: river for which distance is computed, PK, FK->[river_run].river_id  
* put_in_distance <em>real</em>: distance measured in miles from run's starting point to weather station
* take_out_distance <em>real</em>: distance measured in miles from run's ending point to weather station

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (put_in_distance)
+ unclustered index on (station_id, river_id)

Distances are calculated via the following code snippet
```python
    a = sin((lat2-lat1)/2)**2 + cos(lat1) * cos(lat2) * sin((lon2-lon1)/2)**2
    c = 2*atan2(sqrt(a), sqrt(1 - a))

    return r*c*0.621371
```

<b>metric</b> - <i>stores all the metric types that will be used for prediction</i>     
* metric_id <em>varchar(31)</em>: the metric's id as listed by original data source, PK
* name <em>varchar(31)</em>: the metric's human readable name as listed by original data source
* description <em>varchar(255)</em>: brief description of the metric
* units <em>varchar(31)</em>: units for which the metric is recorded in

<b>measurement</b> - <i>stores all gathered measurements from each weather station</i>     
* station_id <em>varchar(31)</em> id of weather station for which the measurement was recorded, PK, FK->[station].station_id
* metric_id <em>varchar(31)</em> id of associated metric being measured, PK, FK->[metric].metric_id
* date_time <em>timestamp</em> timestamp for when the measurement was recorded, PK
* value <em>real</em> the measurement value recorded

<i>indices</i>
+ clustered index on (date_time)
+ unclustered index on (station_id), (metric_id)

### Continuous Data Retrieval
Retrieving all static and historical data need only be done once, but to keep the data up to date we need to continuously retrieve and integrate all new time series data into the database. The plan is to retrieve new time series data from the following categories on a daily basis.

#### Temperature/Precipitation Data
Since retrieving historical temperature and precipitation data from NOAA involves sending a request and receiving an email in response containing a link to download the requested data (a process that would be cumbersome to repeat on a daily basis), it would be ideal to find a separate source for daily temperature and precipitation data. After a separate source is found with simpler automatability, we will begin the process of automatically retrieving and ingesting time series temperature and precipitation data into the database on a daily basis.

#### Snowpack Data
As part of the process of retrieving historical snowpack data, we retrieve time series data one day at a time. So, the `scrape_snowfall()` function can seemlessly be reused to continuously retrieve new data, with the only modification needed is to automate the uploading of snowpack data into the database.

#### River Metric Data
<a href='https://waterservices.usgs.gov/rest/IV-Test-Tool.html'>USGS's Instantaneous Values API</a> makes it easy to automate the continuous retrieval of time series data. The only difference between retrieving historical data and continuously retrieving river metric data from USGS is eliminating the creation of an intermediate CSV file and, instead, inserting the JSON data returned from the API directly into the database.

### Web server
A simple web server will be required to process user requests. This will be implemented using nodejs running on Ubuntu Server 16.06 LTE.

<b>Web requests</b> will be processed through a single nodejs HTTP endpoint.

<b>Prediction data</b> will be provided on demand and cached by the browser once retrieved. These requests will go through the same HTTP endpoint and provide JSON data as a result.

### Server side predictions
Future river flow rates are predicted using an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model generated from historic USGS river flow rate time series data. Temperature and precipitation are included in the models as exogenous predictor variables; snowpack will be included as an exogenous predictor at a later date if deemed useful, but will not be used for the first release. Models are generated using the past four years of historical data up to the current day, and predictions are made for the future seven days.

Exploration of the data was completed using `arima_exploration.py`. The `test_stationarity()` function was used to determine that flow rate is non-stationary on a short timeframe due to annual seasonality but stationary over longer periods of time; since most variation is caused short-term spikes in flow rate, this is averaged out over longer periods. Due to the large difference between the seasonality timeframe (annual) and the prediction timeframe (daily), the best models with the highest probability of convergence resulted from using an ARMA model (no differencing) on several years worth of stationary data for the run. The optimal order of the ARMA model for each run (i.e. p and q parameters) was examined for a few test runs using `plot_autocorrs()` to generate autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots for lag order and moving average order respectively. Since this analysis must be done manually, the order of ongoing models is determined using built-in python functions.

The module `arima.py` is used to build and fit the flow rate models for a given river run. The `get_data()` function retrieves data for a selected run from the database for past four years from the current date using `Repository.get_measurements()` function. Feature engineering to create daily averages of all predictor variables is completed using the `daily_avg()` function. The `arima_model()` function is used to create the model for the given run. ARIMA model orders for each run are determined each time using the python statsmodels.tsa.stattools package's arma_order_select_ic function using AIC penalized likelihood criteria. These results are then fed along with the data into the python statsmodels.tsa.arima_model package's ARIMA function to build the model. Finally, the model .forecast function is used to generate predictions for the next seven days. In case of non-convergence at either the order determination or model fitting, `arima_model()` will return the last known flow rate value applied to the next seven days. 

Immediately following daily data retrieval, the ARIMA models are recalculated for each run with the results stored in a dataframe for plotting.

### Client side interface
A single HTML page will be created matching the mockup described in the functional specifications of this application. The page will store all required javascript and CSS data as the entire application only consists of a single page.

## Interactions
### Use case 1: The paddler
The paddler requests to view stream flow predictions for a specific kayaking run. The user has two options for finding a river's flow rate predictions:
1. User searches for a river by typing the river name in the top search bar. The bar will autopopulate with a drop down to filter run names as the user types. Selecting a run will request a prediction.
2. User views the runs populated on the map, clicking a point to retrieve predictions.

The page will have loaded with a .csv file containing predictions for the following two weeks. Using javascript, the prediction image will redraw with the selected run's prediction.
